# WORKED OUT
### Video Demo:  <URL HERE>
### Description:
In overview, the "Worked Out" App is used by a personal trainer to keep track of clients and workout sessions they perform together. The app performs CRUD operations on both the clients and on the workouts, which are cross referenced to one another.

#### Django and File Structure
The writing of the project took place primarily in **Python 3.13.5** informed by **Django 4.2.24** (to mesh well with **Bootstrap 5.0.2**, see below). Because the Django web framework sets up many files on its own, the work was primarily in editing and fleshing out those files and their relations to one another. The folders within the project are these:
* `worked_out` : Contains the settings file and the central URL clearinghouse.
* `workouts` : Contains the models, forms, views, and URL logic for tracking client and workout information.
* `accounts` : Contains the models, views, and URL logic for authentication of the user (i.e., the trainer).
* `templates` : Contains the HTML, CSS, and JavaScript for end user presentation of the app.

Each of these folders' primary files will be treated in turn.

#### The `worked_out` Folder
* `settings.py` : This file defines many settings for Django to correctly implement the whole of the project. The primary settings necessary for the project to function were a listing of the installed apps (`crispy_forms`, `crispy_bootstrap5`, `accounts`, `workouts`), a key to the centralized `templates` folder (see below), and information pertinent to the built-in authentication features of Django (see `accounts` below).
* `urls.py` : This file is the central router of URLs to their correct destinations. This is the most important of the three companion files of the same name, as it "includes" the URLs of the two apps in the other folders described below. It also defines the administrator URL necessary for debugging early in the project.

#### The `workouts` Folder
* `models.py` : The two models in this file are the heart of the data structure necessary for serving the user's needs. Django allows for, instead of traditional SQL table creation and queries, tables and their rows to be created through class definitions with its so-called "models". The Client model outlines everything necessary to track a client's biographical information, including their tie (foreign key) to a particular trainer (see next folder below). The Workout model does the same for a workout session, including a foreign key to a particular client. The robust definitions of these classes here allow for streamlined use of forms and data manipulation related to these tables in other parts of the project.
* `forms.py` : This file defines how the models' fields appear to the user, in terms of labels and widgets. Of particular interest is the choice to hide the foreign keys from the user. (The user does not need to know that they themselves are the trainer for this client, or that the client themselves is the client for this workout -- these are assumed to be true and should not be able to be changed.) The fields for birthdate of the client and for date of the workout are also explicitly given widgets that work best for input of that data.
* `views.py` : The "views" in this file define the logic by which different templates (HTML files with templating language) are served to the user. They also control how the user is able to affect the data in the backend table. In overview, each view written here is linked to a particular function the user wants to see happen and its corresponding HTML template. (This is excluding authentication functionality, see below.) The views are written with the decorator `@login_required` for security, as well. The views differentiate between GET and POST HTTP requests and, for example, either present a blank form, a prepopulated form, or else save a form's information to the database, depending on the particulars of the request. There are eight views written here to account for two models' worth of CRUD, along with an extra "read" view that shows all workouts by a particular client. Of note is that the `index_view` and `all_workouts_view` filter their results by the user who is making the request. This ensures that these views and any subsequent ones show only the clients with whom that user (trainer) is working.
* `urls.py` : This is the younger sibling to the file of the same name mentioned above. It ties URLs in the address bar to the correct views in the `views.py` file. Integers present at the end of the URLs serve to pass information with the HTTP request to those views (e.g., the ID number of a client or workout).

#### The `accounts` Folder
* `models.py` : Here the User class (i.e., the trainer account using the app) is defined as simply a child of the built-in Django AbstractUser class. This design was chosen (over, for example, a custom user model) for the streamlined data structure that would be predefined by Django for the user (e.g., ID, name, password, email) and the ability to easily set up the user through the command line. The User is treated as a foreign key for the Client model described above. (I.e., each client has a trainer.)
* `views.py` : This file, unlike its counterpart in the `workouts` folder, is not necessary to be fleshed out, since each authentication "view" is a built-in Django feature than can be referenced directly through URLs. (See next file.)
* `urls.py` :  The list of paths in this file point to built-in Django functionality for logging in, logging out, changing the password, and confirming the change of password. This design was chosen to exclude the function of registering new users/trainers, as the app is intended to function only for a handful of users who can be set up through the command line. (The lack of a registration feature is a choice to ensure security.)

#### The `templates` Folder
* `layout.html` : This HTML template is the one extended to all of the other pages in the project. Its main function is to establish style consistency, as well as a handy navigation bar at the top. These purposes are served in several places in the template. First, an external stylesheet is referenced, to **Bootstrap 5.0.2**. This ensures a pleasing aesthetic for tables and the navigation bar. Second, internal style is briefly defined to support coloration, padding of the navigation bar, and smaller formatting of text areas (for use on mobile devices). Third, external scripts for **jQuery 3.7.1** and **Bootstrap 5.0.2** ensure responsiveness in the navigation bar (i.e., its ability to collapse and expand in response to resizing and clicking).
* `index.html` and `all_workouts_list.html` : The `index.html` is the default page that the user sees after logging in. The `index_view` passes it the clients list that is relevant to the user, and the Django templating language serves a list of the different clients' information, along with any actions the user might want to perform with them. The `all_workouts_list` serves a similar function by listing all the workouts filtered by this particular user/trainer and RUD (not C here) actions available.
* `new_client_form.html` and `new_workout_form.html` : These are the C portion of CRUD for the two models in this project. Their forms (and *all* forms in this project) utilize CSRF tokens for security and **Django Crispy Forms 2.4** with **Crispy Bootstrap 5 2025.6** for aesthetics. Forms are passed directly from the respective views into the templates, for minimizing writing of forms within the template itself.
* `client_update_form.html` and `workout_update_form.html` : These forms are similar to the above, but they are prepopulated with information already in the database. Upon completion, the entries are updated instead of created.
* `delete_client_confirm.html` and `delete_workout_confirm.html` : These forms are simple two-button confirmation/cancellation forms for a delete action prompted by the user on another template.
* `workout_list_by_client` : This template presents a special reading of the database, in which it queries all workouts but filters by a particular client. Thus, the user/trainer can "at a glance" see the biographical information (from the Client model) along with the workout information (from the Workout model) for a given client. Buttons are present to create a new workout for this client or to view/update/delete previous workouts. Apart from the index, this will likely be the most utilized template by the user.
* `registration` Subfolder : The four templates contained here are the login, logout, and password change HTML pages. These templates are sparse and utilitarian, to serve as simple scaffolding on the main app.

#### The Root Folder
* `db.sqlite3` : This file is the backend database that contains tabular information about users/trainers, clients, and the workouts. It is interacted with via the forms described above. (Administrator tools can also access it to debug.)